




Recent immigration, lack of partner support and pregnancy-induced  hypertension  are significant factors in predicting 

whether women will experience depressive symptoms soon after giving birth, says a University of Toronto researcher.    
U of T nursing professor Cindy-Lee Dennis and colleagues at the University of British Columbia have developed a model that 

predicts which mothers are at high risk of developing depressive symptoms in the early postpartum period. Their study, 

published in the fall issue of Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavia, looked at almost 600 British Columbia mothers between April 

2001 and January 2002.    
Early detection is important, says Dennis, since low mood shortly after delivery is a reliable predictor of later developing 

 postpartum depression .    
\"Postpartum depression is a major public health issue that has significant consequences for the mother, child and family,\" 

says Dennis. \"Fortunately, postpartum depression is amenable to supportive interventions early in the postpartum period. 

Previous studies have identified high-risk mothers at six to eight weeks after birth. Why wait until the mothers are 

depressed? Why not identify symptoms early so that so secondary preventive interventions can be initiated?\"    
Previous research has suggested that 13 per cent of new mothers suffer from postpartum depression. Such  depression  may 

incapacitate them, but it also has a negative impact on their babies. Children of depressed mothers may exhibit attachment 

insecurity, emotional developmental delay and difficulties with social interaction.    
The researchers identified a number of factors that make women vulnerable to depressive symptoms in the immediate postpartum 

period, including immigration during the five years prior to giving birth, pregnancy-induced hypertension, lack of partner 

support and lack of readiness for hospital discharge. The researchers also determined it is important to assess past 

depressive episodes, vulnerable personality traits, recent stressful life events, availability of support and maternal 

adjustment in identifying new mothers at risk for postpartum depression.    
\"The next step is to develop accessible and effective preventive and treatment plans for these women,\" says Dennis.    
CONTACT: Cindy-Lee Dennis, Faculty of Nursing, 416-946-8608,   cindylee.dennis@utoronto.ca or Elaine Smith, U of T Public 

Affairs, 416-978-5949, elaine.smith@utoronto.ca    
Contact: Cindy-Lee Dennis  
416-946-8608  
 University of Toronto 