




The scientists found that depressed female monkeys become socially withdrawn and have reduced body fat, low levels of 

activity, high heart rates and disruptions in hormone levels - all of which are known or suspected characteristics of major 

 depression  in women. Their research is based on female monkeys because women are 66 percent more likely than men to 

experience depression during their lifetimes.    
"We believe these monkeys can be a useful model for learning more about depression in women," said Carol Shively, Ph.D., 

professor of pathology at Wake Forest Baptist. "Current ways to treat depression are only partially successful. This may be 

an important opportunity to develop and test new treatments."    
She said that with current treatments, there's often a difference between men and women in effectiveness and side effects. 

The animal model will allow scientists to evaluate the effectiveness of treatment specifically in females, the population at 

greatest risk.    
The study involved 36 adult female cynomolgus monkeys, who normally live in social groups in the wild. For most of the 

research, the animals lived in groups of four and their social interactions and behavior were observed. Depressive behavior 

included a slumped or collapsed body posture accompanied by a lack of response to events or objects in the environment in 

which other monkeys were interested.    
The researchers found that the depressed monkeys had suppressed ovarian function, but continued to have menstrual periods. 

Irregular  ovulation  can lead to low  estrogen  levels, which have been associated in both women and monkeys with increased risk 

of disease in the arteries leading to the heart.    
"This suggests the possibility that depressed women may have low ovarian function that goes unnoticed because they still have 

menstrual periods," said Shively. "If this turns out to be accurate, it could explain, in part, the observed relationship 

between  coronary artery disease  and depression."    
The researchers said monkeys may be particularly useful for learning more about human depression for several reasons. In 

women, depression is often associated with changes in reproduction, including the beginning of menstruation (premenstrual 

syndrome or PMS), pregnancy, the post-partum period and perimenopause. Monkeys have menstrual cycles that are very similar to 

those of women.    
"Further studies of monkeys may inform us about the nature of the relationship between reproductive function and mood in 

females," said Shively.    
In addition, depression is higher among people with low levels of education and income. Some female monkeys face social 

 stress  that is similar to the stress that humans with low socioeconomic status experience. In some cases, these monkeys were 

also more prone to depression.    
"What we've observed in these monkeys is the first animal model of social stress-related depression in females," said 

Shively.    
In monkeys, the social stress comes from the social hierarchies they naturally form when they live in groups. Monkeys that 

are the low-status or "subordinate" animals in the group face more aggression, are more vigilant, spend less time being 

groomed - a friendly behavior by monkey standards - and spend more time alone. Previous research has shown that they have 

increased heart rates, more of the stress hormone cortisol and more cardiovascular disease than dominant monkeys.    
Depressive disorders affect about 19 million Americans yearly. The lifetime prevalence rate of major depression in women is 

21 percent, compared to 12.7 percent for men. Depression in women can have negative effects on children as well as marriage. 

In addition, women who develop depression before age 18 are less likely to obtain a college or graduate degree, reducing 

their future earning potential.    
Other researchers involved in the project were Thomas Register, Ph.D., David Friedman, Ph.D., Timothy Morgan, Ph.D., Jalonda 

Thompson and Tasha Lanier, all from Wake Forest Baptist.    
Contacts: Karen Richardson, krchrdsn@wfubmc.edu; Shannon Koontz, shkoontz@wfubmc.edu; at 336-716-4587.    
About Wake Forest University Baptist Medical Center: Wake Forest Baptist is an academic health system comprised of North 

Carolina Baptist Hospital and Wake Forest University Health Sciences, which operates the university's School of Medicine. The 

system comprises 1,282 acute care, psychiatric, rehabilitation and long-term care beds and is consistently ranked as one of 

"America's Best Hospitals" by U.S. News & World Report.    
Karen Richardson - krchrdsn@wfubmc.edu  
 Wake Forest University Baptist Medical Center 