




Twenty-five percent of adolescents and young adults will experience a depressive episode by age 24, yet fewer than 20 

percent receive high-quality care. In a cross-sectional study of 10,962 young adults aged 16 to 29 years with significant 

depressive symptoms, more than one quarter (26 percent) of the participants said they did not intend to accept their 

physician\'s diagnosis of  depression .    
The authors uncovered a number of reasons why these patients refused the diagnosis of depression. Among the most important 

reasons were the belief that the treatment does not work, concern about the stigma from family and friends, and lack of past 

helpful treatment experiences.    
These findings suggest that negative attitudes and concerns about stigma may be important barriers to youth accepting and 

complying with treatment. The authors assert that improved reimbursement to primary care physicians for visits in which they 

negotiate diagnosis and treatment plans with depressed patients could improve treatment rates.    
Beliefs and Attitudes Associated with the Intention Not to Accept the Diagnosis of Depression Among Young Adults  
By Benjamin W. Van Voorhees, M.D., M.P.H., et al    
Angela Lower - alower@aafp.org  
 American Academy of Family Physicians   
 January/February Annals of Family Medicine tip sheet   
Annals of Family Medicine is a peer-reviewed research journal that provides a cross-disciplinary forum for new, 

evidence-based information affecting the primary care discipline. Launched in May 2003, the journal is sponsored by six 

family medical organizations, including the American Academy of Family Physicians, the American Board of Family Practice, the 

Society of Teachers of Family Medicine, the Association of Departments of Family Medicine, the Association of Family Practice 

Residency Directors and the North American Primary Care Research Group. The journal is published six times each year and 

contains original research from the clinical, biomedical, social and health services areas, as well as contributions on 

methodology and theory, selected reviews, essays and editorials. A board of directors with representatives from each of the 

sponsoring organizations oversees Annals. Complete editorial content and interactive discussion groups can be accessed free 

of charge on the journal\'s Web site,  American Academy of Family 

Physicians . 