




Two new studies in the February 2 issue of the Journal of the National Cancer Institute have found that sun exposure may 

have a beneficial influence on some types of  cancer . One study found an association between sun exposure and increased 

survival from  melanoma , a potentially deadly form of  skin cancer  for which sun exposure is a risk factor, while the other 

found an association between sun exposure and a reduced risk of non-Hodgkin  lymphoma .    
Solar radiation is a major risk factor for melanoma. The incidence of and mortality from melanoma have been increasing over 

the last 50 years in all developed countries with large Caucasian populations. But as the incidence of melanoma increases, so 

does survival, suggesting the possibility that increasing sun exposure increases melanoma survival in addition to melanoma 

incidence. However, increased early detection of melanoma might also explain the increased survival.    
To examine the relationship between sun exposure, early detection, and melanoma survival, Marianne Berwick, Ph.D., M.P.H., of 

the University of New Mexico in Albuquerque, and colleagues conducted a population-based, case-control study of more than 500 

patients from the Connecticut Tumor Registry who had been diagnosed with melanoma in the late 1980s.    
Three measures of sun exposure-sunburn, high intermittent sun exposure, and solar elastosis (an indicator of the skin\'s sun 

damage)-and a personal history of skin awareness (a measure of early detection) were all inversely associated with death from 

melanoma. Melanoma patients with higher levels of sun exposure or skin awareness were less likely to die. In addition, both 

solar elastosis and skin awareness were independently associated with increased survival from melanoma, even after adjusting 

for certain melanoma characteristics, such as lesion thickness and location. The authors conclude that sun exposure is 

associated with increased survival from melanoma.    
\"It would be reasonable to speculate... that the apparently beneficial relationship between sun exposure and survival from 

melanoma could be mediated by  vitamin D ,\" Berwick and colleagues write. \"However, an alternative hypothesis is that sun 

exposure induces less aggressive melanomas by inducing melanization and increasing DNA repair capacity, both of which might 

reduce further mutational changes in a melanoma. Which, if either, hypothesis is more plausible remains to be determined.\" 
  
Non-Hodgkin lymphoma has also been on the rise worldwide, and it has been suggested that increasing ultraviolet (UV) 

radiation and sun exposure may be partly responsible. To investigate this hypothesis, Karin Ekstr?m Smedby, of the Karolinska 

Institute in Stockholm, and colleagues conducted a population-based, case-control study in Denmark and Sweden in which they 

obtained detailed information on history of UV exposure and other risk factors for lymphoma from more than 3,000 lymphoma 

patients and a similar number of control subjects.    
They found that increased exposure to UV radiation through sunbathing and sunburns was associated with a decrease, rather 

than an increase, in the risk of non-Hodgkin lymphoma. Increased UV exposure was also associated, although more weakly, with 

a decreased risk of Hodgkin lymphoma.    
\"[These] results suggest an inverse association between UV light exposure and non-Hodgkin lymphoma risk,\" Smedby and 

colleagues write. \"However, before this association can be considered causal we need further confirmatory data from other 

epidemiologic studies and, ideally, a better understanding of possible biologic mechanisms,\" including UV-induced systemic 

immune modulation and the photo-initiation of  vitamin  D production.    
In an editorial, William J. Blot, Ph.D., of the International Epidemiology Institute in Rockville, Md., and colleagues 

discuss how the results of these two studies provide new evidence that sunlight may have a beneficial influence on both 

cancer incidence and outcome and hypothesize that vitamin D may be a critical mediator in the relationship between sunlight 

and cancer. \"In view of the major potential public health consequence of these results, further studies of sunlight and the 

vitamin D connection to cancer are certainly warranted,\" they conclude.    
Contacts:    
-- Berwick article: Harriet Bull, UNM Cancer Research & Treatment Center, 505-272-6794, hbull@salud.unm.edu    
-- Smedby article: Karin Ekstr?m Smedby, Karolinska Institutet, +591-2-277 15, ekstrom@meb.ki.se    
-- Editorial: Cynthia Manley, Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center, 615-936-5711, cynthia.manley@vanderbilt.edu    
Citations:    
-- Article: Berwick M, Armstrong BK, Ben-Porat L, Fine J, Kricker A, Eberle C, et al. Sun Exposure and Mortality From 

Melanoma. J Natl Cancer Inst 2005;97:  195-99 .    
-- Article: Smedby KE, Hjalgrim H, Melbye M, Torr?ng A, Rostgaard K, Munksgaard L, et al. Ultraviolet Radiation Exposure and 

Risk of Malignant Lymphomas. J Natl Cancer Inst 2005;97:  199-209 .  

-- Editorial: Egan KM, Sosman JA, Blot WJ. Sunlight and Reduced Risk of Cancer: Is The Real Story Vitamin D? J Natl Cancer 

Inst 2005;97:  161-63 . 

   
Note: The Journal of the National Cancer Institute is published by Oxford University Press and is not affiliated with the 

National Cancer Institute. Attribution to the Journal of the National Cancer Institute is requested in all news coverage. 

Visit the Journal online at  jncicancerspectrum.oupjournals.org .    
Sarah L. Zielinski   
jncimedia@oupjournals.org   
301-841-1287   
Journal of the National Cancer Institute   
 This is a press release 

from the Journal of the National Cancer Institute 