




Successful treatment of  depression  not only improves older adults\' emotional health, but also helps them perform such 

daily activities as remembering to take medications, according to a study published in the March 2005 issue of the Journal of 

the American Geriatrics Society by Indiana University School of Medicine researchers.    
This is the first study to report that successful treatment of depression in older adults also improves their ability to 

perform tasks critical to independent living such as keeping track of medications or managing money. Prior clinical trials of 

successful treatment of depression in this age group reported improvement in emotional functioning, but had not demonstrated 

that improved emotional health also translated into improved physical health. Older adults with depression report persistent 

greater functional impairment than those without depression.    
\"This study is important for two reasons,\" said Christopher Callahan, M.D., Cornelius W. and Yvonne Pettinga Professor in 

Aging Research at the IU School of Medicine. \"First, it shows that even older adults with failing physical health can be 

successfully treated for depression. Second, it shows that treating the depression also helps slow the physical decline.\" 

   
Dr. Callahan is director of the Indiana University Center for Aging Research and principal author of the article.    
Study participants were placed randomly into two groups. One group received standard care for depression from their primary 

care physician. A depression clinical specialist (a nurse or psychologist) as well the patient\'s primary care physician 

co-managed depression treatment for those in the second group.    
In both groups, patients whose depression improved were more likely to experience improvement in physical functioning than 

patients whose depression was not successfully treated, the study found.    
Depression was more likely to improve in those who received treatment by collaborative care management than those who had 

usual care. One hallmark of the intervention was the \"stepped care\" approach or the ability to increase the intensity of the 

treatment over time if patients did not respond to initial treatments.    
This study is part of Project IMPACT, which followed 1,801 patients age 60 and older with major depressive symptoms for 12 

months. Participants in the IMPACT study, the largest clinical trial of late-life depression reported to date, were from 18 

primary care clinics across the United States.    
\"Patients with late-life depression often experience a downward spiral of worsening depression and function,\" the study 

authors concluded. \"Effective treatment of late-life depression by a collaborative stepped-care program in primary care may 

interrupt this downward spiral.\"    
In an accompanying editorial, Duke University\'s Dan Blazer, M.D., Ph.D., noted the bench-to-bedside practicality of this 

research. \"The findings of the IMPACT study are prime for translation into clinical practice changes that will improve the 

quality of life for many older adults. Primary care practices take note!\"    
The study was supported by grants from the John A. Hartford Foundation, the California Healthcare Foundation, the Hogg 

Foundation and the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation.    
Contact: Cindy Fox Aisen  
caisen@iupui.edu  
317-274-7722  
Indiana University  
 http://newsinfo.iu.edu 