




Can you distinguish behavior
that suggests a girl is in trouble from typical teen angst or attitude? Is
your teenage daughter at risk for  depression ? One in four are, and you might
not know it.    
    There are wide ranging issues parents must face that include: sexual
escapades (such as friends with benefits), low self-esteem, bullying, drugs,
break-ups, eating disorders and depression.    
    Harvard researcher and adolescent psychotherapist, Dr. Lisa Machoian,
knows what girls are dealing with and the cultural influences that transform
them.    
    In her new book, The Disappearing Girl: Learning the Language of Teenage
Depression (Dutton Books/$24.95.), the first book on the subject, Machoian
presents personal stories from dozens of girls who are living these challenges
daily. She maps out a plan for parents that will assist them in learning how
to prevent, identify, and, most importantly, help girls with these issues.    
    Girls\' depression is not just moods but also about thinking. \"Beyond
learning the risks, signals and symptoms of depression and addressing them
head-on, parents must also learn how to help their daughters navigate and
think critically about the images, the messages, and the unspoken rules of
today\'s adolescence.\"    
    A prominent finding in her research is the fact that, even in the midst of
depression, adolescents have hope inside them-hope of getting help and being
their real self. \"Because hope is still alive, this age is a prime time for
intervention,\" says Machoian.    
    The book provides parents, teachers, and girls with ways to build healthy
self-esteem, start meaningful conversations and to de-stress.
    According to Machoian, by talking about what girls will encounter in the
world and the meaning it has to them, by raising their awareness of gender
roles, parents can help girls survive their preadolescent and teenage years.
The book includes the Emotional First Aid Kit-strategies for self-expression
and coping.    

    NOTE TO EDITORS: For more information, to schedule an interview with Dr.
Lisa Machoian or to request a copy of The Disappearing Girl: Learning the
Language of Teenage Depression contact Rose Carrano 646-638-2181 (NYC) or
rosecarrano@earthlink.net   

    The Disappearing Girl: Learning the Language of Teenage Depression is
available at bookstores throughout the USA. 