




A study in the May Journal of the American Geriatrics Society combats the notion that ethnic differences and inherent 

biases are responsible for a lower number of  depression  diagnoses in the African American elderly population versus whites. 

   
Researchers from Michigan surveyed nearly 180 primary care providers, randomly assigning them to view one of four videos 

exhibiting commonly accepted traits of a depressed older adult. The actors used in the videos worked from the same script and 

differed only by race and/or sex. Eighty-five percent of providers correctly diagnosed the \"patient\" on the video they were 

assigned.    
\"Primary care providers are just as likely to diagnose and treat depression in older African Americans as in whites, 

suggesting that bias based simply on apparent patient race is not a likely explanation for the lower rates of depression 

diagnosis and treatment in older African Americans,\" according to researchers.    
The study notes that the management of depression is especially critical in the elderly due to already existing and multiple 

illnesses. Further, studies show that older adults are less likely to seek specific  mental health  treatment from 

psychiatrists, turning solely to their primary care physicians.    
This study is published in the Journal of the American Geriatrics Society. Media wishing to receive a PDF of this article 

please contact medicalnews@bos.blackwellpublishing.net.    
 About the Journal of the American Geriatrics Society   
The Journal of the American Geriatrics Society publishes articles that are relevant in the broadest terms to the clinical 

care of older persons. Such articles may span a variety of disciplines and fields and may be of immediate, intermediate, or 

long-term potential benefit to clinical practice.    
 About the American Geriatrics Society   
The American Geriatrics Society (AGS) is the premier professional organization of health care providers dedicated to 

improving the health and well-being of all older adults. With an active membership of over 6,000 health care professionals, 

the AGS has a long history of effecting change in the provision of health care for older adults. In the last decade, the 

Society has become a pivotal force in shaping attitudes, policies and practices regarding health care for older people. Visit 

 http://www.americangeriatrics.org  for more information. 

   
 About Blackwell Publishing   
Blackwell Publishing is the world\'s leading society publisher, partnering with more than 600 academic and professional 

societies. Blackwell publishes over 750 journals and 600 text and reference books annually, across a wide range of academic, 

medical, and professional subjects.    
Contact: Sharon Agslda  
medicalnews@bos.blackwellpublishing.net  
781-388-8507  
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.   
 http://www.blackwellpublishing.com 