




According to a reputable researcher, 70% of  colon cancers  are preventable if we changed our diets a bit.    
According to current research, there are several things you could do.  Researchers say that future research will tell us which of the inter-related strategies (in your diet plan) would be the best for your particular needs.    
One factor most experts agree about is  insulin resistance .  As the body becomes less responsive to  insulin , it produces more (insulin) to make up for this.    
High insulin levels along with related growth factors trigger changes in cell processes in ways that aid the development of  cancers .    
Inactive and overweight people (apple shaped people this big waists) are more likely to develop colon cancer.  Inactive and overweight people tend to be more insulin resistant, and hence have higher levels of insulin in their bodies.    
According to new studies, if you consume lots of saturated fats and refined  carbohydrates  (sugars and refined grains) you are increasing your risk of getting colon cancers (because of the effect you will be having on your insulin levels, among other things).    

The National Cancer Institute (USA) advises people to take more exercise.  Exercise, as well as having the obvious benefits we all know about, also stops your insulin levels from going up (keeps them down).    
The American Institute for Cancer Research (AICR) advises people to take an hour of moderate exercise each day.    
Consuming enough  calcium  is the latest strategy to lower colon cancer risk. A recent study looked at the recurrence of colon polyps, which are noncancerous growths that can turn into cancer. Polyp recurrence was 29 percent lower with a higher consumption of calcium and  vitamin D .    
Research presented at AICR?s most recent research conference suggested that calcium might be especially important for those with a high-fat diet. By binding fatty acids and bile acids ? both of which promote cancer ? in our digestive tract, calcium may protect the colon. 