




Those who like to eat ham and brats every day, significantly increase their risk of getting  colorectal cancer . In 

contrast, if fish is a regular part of one's diet, colorectal cancer risk is lowered. Earlier investigation results had 

already suggested these interrelations. The evaluation of a study with about half a million participants has now confirmed 

the hypothesis.    

Study participants from ten European countries have been questioned about their dietary habits and lifestyles since 1992 in a 

study named ?EPIC? (European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition). These data are studied in relation to the 

incidence of new  cancer  cases among participants. EPIC study centers in Germany are: the German Cancer Research Center 

(Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum, DKFZ), Heidelberg, and the German Institute of Human Nutrition (Deutsches Institut f?r 

Ern?hrungsforschung Potsdam-Rehbr?cke, DIfE).    

Epidemiologists of the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) in Lyon, France, which coordinates EPIC, jointly 

with colleagues from other EPIC study centers, have now published results on the relationship between meat and fish 

consumption and colorectal cancer risk. The analysis is based on 1.329 cases of rectal and  colon cancer  that have been newly 

diagnosed among participants since the study was started.    
Study subjects who had eaten a lot of what is called ?red? meat (i.e., pork, beef, veal, and lamb) or such meat products were 

diagnosed with colorectal cancer more often than persons who ate only little of it. With fish, things are exactly opposite: 

Those who ate a lot of fish were found to have a significantly lower colorectal cancer risk compared to those with a low fish 

consumption. The consumption of poultry played no role for colorectal cancer incidence.    

Researchers estimate that the risk of colorectal cancer increases by 49% per 100 grams of daily consumed ?red? meat. An 

increase in daily sausage consumption by 100 grams elevates the risk even by 70%. In contrast, 100 grams more fish daily 

reduce the disease risk by one half. 
These figures take account of the influence of different factors such as gender,  body weight , alcohol comsumption, physical 

exercise or smoking on the disease risk. In addition, the data were processed using a method that reduces inaccuracies in the 

information provided by study participants on their dietary habits.    

The scientists propose different explanations for the influence of the consumption of meat and meat products on colorectal 

cancer development. Recent studies suggest that the intake of iron contained in meat may contribute to risk elevation, 

because iron can promote the formation of harmful nitroso compounds in the body. On average, ?red? meat or meat products have 

a higher iron content than poultry, which may explain why consumption of the latter may not have influenced colorectal cancer 

risk in this study. The protective effect of fish consumption may be caused by specific long chain, polyunsaturated  omega-3  

fatty acids.    
Regarding meat and meat products, the results now published confirm evidence provided by earlier studies. They also provide 

renewed evidence suggesting a positive role of fish in human  nutrition . This is how Professor Heiner Boeing and PD Dr. Jakob 

Linseisen, EPIC study directors in Potsdam and Heidelberg, commented the results. These results should alert the Germans, 

said the experts: Germany ranks first in the consumption of sausage products in Europe. Thus, the Germans would benefit most 

from reducing their sausage consumption.    
 http://www.dkfz.de/de/klepidemiologie/arbeitsgr/ernaerepi/ernaerepi.html   
SOURCE:  http://www.alphagalileo.org 